## Udactity Data Engineer Nanodegree Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Datasets available

The song dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.

The log dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by [this event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

## Description of Files

**sql_queries.py:** contains sql queries for dropping and creating tables. Also, contains insertion and song select query.

**create_tables.py:** contains code for setting up database. Running this file creates sparkify_db and also creates the tables.

**etl.ipynb:** a jupyter notebook to analyse dataset before loading.

**etl.py:** read and process song_data and log_data.

**test.ipynb:** a jupyter notebook to connect to postgres database and validate the data loaded.

#### Directory: data/log_data

This directory contains a collection of JSON log files. These files are used to populate our Fact table - Song Plays - and to populate the Dimension tables for Users and Time.

#### Directory: data/song_data

This directory contains a collection of Song JSON files. These files are used to populate Dimension tables for Songs and Artists.

## Setup Instructions and Steps followed

* Install requirements with `pip install -r requirements.txt`.
* Set up a local PostgreSQL instance on port 5432. Please see detailed instructions in the [PostgreSQL documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/runtime.html).

## Program execution

* Execute the script to generate the database and its tables by executing `python create_tables.py`.
* Load the data and insert it to the database by executing `python etl.py`.

## Database Star Schema

### Fact Table
**songplays** - records log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`

```
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
```

### Dimension Tables

**artists**  - artists in music database
```
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
```

**songs**  - songs in music database
```
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
```

**time**  - timestamps of records in  **songplays**  broken down into specific units
```
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
```

**users** - users in the app
```
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
```

### Purpose of this database

This database allows to aggregate all songs, artists, users and songplays in a single database. In this way, the company disposes of the needed data stored in a unique structure and can thus analyze different scenarios easily. For instance, one can analyze the popularity of different songs or artists. Also, it is possible to perform analysis with geographic information. One can for instance determine which song is popular in which country and region.

